Well, I'd like to introduce our first
podcast guest, Professor Thomas
Seyfried. And I would just like to say
thank you for coming on and it's an
honor to have you and I hope we have a
good discussion.
Well, thank you very much. It's nice to
be here today.
Yes, sir. So, when do you think that you
had the epiphany or the kind of aha
moment that cancer is truly a
mitochondrial metabolic disease?
Uh
when when we did
our published our paper in
with my associate Dr. Purna Mukherjee,
who's still here working with me.
Um and then the '03 paper
in in
in British Journal of Cancer
uh when we were able to clearly link
uh the levels of sugar in the blood with
um how fast the tumors could grow
and the anti-angiogenic
anti-inflammatory
uh pro-apoptotic actions of calorie
restriction, which is comparable to
water only fasting.
Uh and
having just read Warburg's seminal paper
once or twice
the connections were uh solid. Um
but it took me another
uh
almost uh
25 years
uh to
uh know exactly where Warburg was
correct and where he was not correct.
And um his his understanding
uh of the situation
uh and the problems that he ran into in
trying to
uh convince others. So,
um but we just recently in our research
here at Boston College
uh provided the first evidence hard
evidence
that uh the amino acid glutamine is also
fermented uh which the most of the field
of cancer does not know about nor did
Warburg know about it. Um but it it
clears up a tremendous amount of
confusion
that was associated with Warburg's
central hypothesis. We also showed
unambiguously
our work provided with others that
oxygen consumption in tumor cells is
largely independent of energy production
through oxidative phosphorylation. Which
um led uh many people to question
Warburg at the beginning showing that
many tumor cells consume oxygen just as
avidly as
as um normal cells.
Uh thereby um
saying Warburg was wrong. And and
Warburg tried to say that it wasn't
wrong, it's just that tumor cells
uh have such a powerful glycolysis that
the presence of their ox phos wasn't
unable to uh put it out. Um but we have
clearly shown that um
ox phos is neither necessary nor
sufficient for driving
the disregulated growth, whereas the
fermentation of glucose and glutamine
are both necessary and sufficient. And
tumor cells cannot burn ketone bodies or
fatty acids.
So, this then puts everything back on
track. Cancer is not as complicated as
people made it out to be. It's driven by
a fermentation metabolism. Uh without
glucose and glutamine, no tumor cell can
survive for very long. And they can't
they're not flexible. They're not uh
capable of great flexibility. They're
locked into a ancient fermentation
pathway and cannot switch to other
metabolites
uh that will replace glucose and
glutamine. So, once you know that you
have the scientific evidence to support
that
then what is standing in the way
of dropping cancer deaths and treating
people more respectfully and and
humanely with the new knowledge of what
we have? So, clearly there's something
other than the basic science that's
preventing the transformation of the way
we treat cancer patients. And it has
nothing to do with the science. It has
largely to do with the profits. The the
profits It's something outside the
scientific zone. So, so but in the end
the science will win. You can only deny
the science for so long.
And and we're starting case reports and
we're seeing people now that if you Uh
but right now no one uh Thomas Seyfried
and I wrote all these papers.
No one has yet designed a clinical trial
doing exactly what we want them to do.
Uh the standards of care uh which are
should always be flexible are written in
granite
uh which are immovable forces uh that
prevent the full power of metabolic
therapy to do its job.
We use standards of care but they have
to be used strategically. Uh not as an
upfront treatment, but as a downstream
effect to polish off any few surviving
tumor cells used in very different
modified ways, which the field is very
resistant against. Um the medical people
going through medical schools aren't
trained to know anything uh uh about the
biochemistry and biology of cancer other
than that it's a genetic disease. So,
you have all these um um
all these obstructions uh in the way of
moving the field rapidly forward
dropping the cancer death rate massively
uh doing this. Not only cancer, but a
lot of other chronic diseases as well.
It's a mitochondrial metabolic disease
uh driven by a fermentation metabolism
uh which can be so easily targeted
relative to what we're doing with an
outcome that will be astonishing. Um but
but all these other things stand in the
way. We have done the science. We have
interrogated what these tumor cells can
use and what they cannot use.
Uh we have we're developing really
really sophisticated beautiful ways to
treat high-grade gliomas in children.
Pediatric high-grade glioma with really
powerful results that will not be used
in the clinics because it doesn't
involve radiation or chemo, the types of
chemo that are presently being used. So,
unfortunately, we must sacrifice all
these little kids
uh
unnecessarily, which is a heartbreaker.
Um so so we see all this that we're and
we will it it's just a matter of time.
The young physicians
are interested in this. Um they're
starting to unshackle themselves
um from the previous dogma and they want
to see good by their patients and they
they will slowly make the change. But
right now um we're doing all we can to
to force the paradigm change.
If you want to learn how to implement
the ketogenic diet and the press-pulse
protocol into your cancer management,
just visit school.com/ketofor
cancer, the new community by our
research analyst Johnny Rocker Meyer.
Within this new community platform, you
can connect with other patients and
learn from their experiences.
You can also just search through the
posts other members have already made.
You will have access to our classroom
section as well, which provides
practical advice and tools for the best
results.
These sections cover all parts of the
press-pulse protocol that you should
implement.
Starting with the general scientific
concepts by Dr. Thomas Seyfried, we will
show you how to start the ketogenic diet
including which foods to choose and
which to avoid.
Additionally, we prepared a list of
doctors specialized in metabolic therapy
as well as details about glutamine
inhibition and hyperbaric oxygen
protocols.
So, take a look around at
school.com/ketofor
cancer.
Yeah. No, I I think I think everybody
from
who watches this channel appreciates
that like from the bottom of their
heart. There's no question. And um you
know, there is an explosion of cancer uh
it seems to be happening. You know,
that's definitely what at least in
in part, you know, motivated me because
I have to be the one who when someone
comes in to with abdominal pain and they
get a CT of their abdomen pelvis be the
one to tell them that they have likely
metastatic cancer for the first time and
it's you know, it's always hard telling
someone that, but when it's someone
who's young like you're talking about
these kids with I don't I don't do kids.
I'm a an adult internal medicine doctor,
but when it's an a young adult and they
got you know, metastatic cancer, it's
just it just makes it a whole layer
worse to having that conversation. Um
I did notice in your most recent paper
and the one that was published in April
of 2025, which I am doing a whole video
series on cuz it's such a great paper.
You guys are trying to get away from
using the word Warburg effect and I was
just trying to figure out why that was.
It's ambiguous. Um it was
it was coined by Ephraim Racker at
Cornell University. Um as kind of a uh
offshoot of the Pasteur effect. Um the
Pasteur effect is the situation, which
is very complicated biochemically
why oxygen shuts down fermentation in
yeast. Uh yeast cells will ferment when
oxygen is not available, but the yeast
evolved to have that capacity.
A yeast cell is equally comfortable
fermenting as it is respiring. Although
as Warburg said, they can only ferment
for so long and when you start to
respire again, there's a whole new
generation of of life
uh that comes back into the organism.
But the the Pasteur effect is the
suppression of
um
fermentation by oxygen. So, um what's um
Racker said, well, the Warburg effect is
the continual fermentation
of lactic acid in the presence of
oxygen. But there's a lot of
complications behind that. What do you
mean?
Um because before because we have what
is what is the fermentation mechanism
actually involved? It's a substrate
level phosphorylation. Correct. It's the
movement of a phosphate group from an
organic substrate
onto ADP to form ATP, and that's usually
part of the payoff phase of the
Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas pathway.
Um
and and that seems to persist actively
even in the presence of oxygen. And
Warburg attributed that
to dysfunctional mitochondria. The
reason why they continued to to do that
is because they don't have effective
oxidative phosphorylation. But the field
argued against that because they said,
"No, that can't be because the tumor
cells are consuming oxygen at the same
Some tumor, not all. At the same at a
rate similar to that of normal cells."
Because the field
assumed
that oxygen consumption was an accurate
biomarker for ATP production through
oxidative phosphorylation. Warburg said
the same thing. He said, "1 mole of
oxygen consumed equals 7 moles of ATP,
whereas 1 mole of lactic acid produced
is 1 mole of ATP." So, 1 mole of oxygen,
7 moles of ATP. 1 mole of lactate
produced, 1 mole of ATP. All that's
wrong.
We we we have shown that those those
estimates are no longer correct because
oxygen consumption in a cancer cell is
used to produce reactive oxygen species
and drive other oxygen demanding
reactions independent of oxidative
phosphorylation.
Well, where's the ATP? I can see ATP
coming out of the mitochondria when they
take in oxygen.
Only if they have glutamine in the
media, and that glutamine is being
fermented through mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorylation, which
is a second form of energy inside the
mitochondria.
Which is really remarkable. So, we we
teamed up with the world leader on
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation, Christos Chinopoulos
from Semmelweis University in Budapest,
Hungary.
So, Christos has been working on that
pathway for decades.
And then I brought it to his attention
that we think cancer cells are doing a
very powerful pathway. It's called the
glutaminolysis pathway.
Most of the people in the field thought
glutamine was being respired. It was
anaplerotic,
which is the feeding of carbons into the
TCA cycle. No, no, no, no.
They're using the the waste product of
glutaminolysis is succinic acid.
It's a waste product, just like lactic
acid is the waste product of cytosolic
substrate level phosphorylation.
Succinic acid is the waste product of
mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation in the glutaminolysis
pathway.
So, when I told people on the web uh
that cancer cells have been telling us
for decades what they're using to stay
alive and grow because they're throwing
out waste products telling us exactly
the pathways that they're using. So,
when you see succinic acid and lactic
acid in cancer, and you always see it,
uh you know immediately that they're
fermenting, and that this acidification
is blocking like chemo and radiation,
all the things they were Oh, they're so
tough. They're hardy. They're all this
kind of crap. I said, "Because they're
fermenting. If you take away the
fermentable fuels, they become
remarkably vulnerable to the lowest
doses of chemo and radiation. They're
weak. They're already on the weak."
>> In fact, it's the lactic acid and the
succinic acid tumor microenvironment
that leads to chemotherapy not to be
able to get into the cancer cell,
correct? It gets eaten up by the acidic
microenvironment. Yeah. It it it creates
a wall of acidification around the tumor
cell. And they say, "Oh, we're doing
everything to figure out how we
immunotherapies and radiation and chemo
that doesn't work. They're so powerful."
Yeah, because they're crapping out uh
acidic molecules that all you have to do
is pull the plug on the glucose and
glutamine, and that their protective
shield disappears, and they die. And now
that whatever's left is extremely
vulnerable to the lowest doses of chemo
uh or anything else you want to do. You
throw a little exercise on top of that,
and man, these damn things are getting
hammered. You're and and you don't have
to cause permanent damage to people.
You're This is stupid because the people
Once you understand the biology and
biochemistry of the adversary, you know
how to cleanly manage it. And
the problem is nobody's listening or
understanding. I don't know. Do I speak
in some sort of foreign language that no
one can understand what the hell I'm
saying? Is this language what I just
shared with you so incompre- Is it like
I Einstein's theory of relativity? What
what is going on here? For me, no, but
that's only cuz I love biochemistry, and
I've studied it, and but I think that at
least clinicians, I'll speak for many of
my colleagues, generally we, you know,
being very frank, we learn the the
biochemistry we need to pass our boards,
and then once we get into the clinical
medicine, we just forget about it. Like
as if it's not important. You know, I
think they need to retrain the you guys.
I I think we should stop wasting time
uh on a bunch of that has no
relevance to the clinical practice,
which a lot of it is misinformation in
the first place asking you people to
rote memorize stuff. Once you get into
the cancer clinic, you should do all
your clinical practices with minimal
basic science. And then once you get
into your specific field, roll in the
basic science to be parallel exactly
with the clinical practice that you're
doing. So, that whole that whole field
needs to be reevaluated and and we
should be
>> I think one of the biggest fears um that
people have is that they're now aware of
the cancer stem cell,
and there is
as with some of the things that I'll ask
you later, there is, I think, a
intentional muddying of the waters or
just frankly like misinformation because
they're trying to say that these cancer
stem cells are in the most hypoxic
regions of the tumor,
and then they're trying to argue that
they're using ox phos. Do cancer stem
cells use substrate level
phosphorylation? Yes. Of course.
>> we published it. We have cancer stem
cells, and we have metastatic cells.
Cancer stem cells cannot metastasize.
They don't have the biology to
metastasize. Uh I published Listen to
this.
I my my my most highly cited paper
is uh the paper we published on the
origin of metastatic cancer. It's been
cited one over 1,600
times.
And of those 1,600 citations, about five
people actually read the paper.
They cited because I said one thing,
"Metastatic cancer is largely
responsible for the death of patients."
That's all they cited for.
And then they go on and talk about
cancer
>> That's not very novel.
>> [laughter]
>> Hey, they're I find I find that you
think all these smart guys at the top
medical schools, they know what they're
doing. They just parrot what everybody
else is doing. They're all following
each other. They all say, "Oh, we have
innovative work." You don't have any
innovative work. We got 700,000 people a
day dying from cancer, for Christ's
sake. You What What innovation do you
have down there that's making a
difference? Zero. Right? Give me a
break. 70 people an hour. Oh, I have a
lot of Do you know I saw some guy down
there telling me, "I just got $6 million
from the NIH to study this signaling
pathway." I said, "So what? You tell me
how many people are going to stay alive
because you understand that signaling
pathway. We spent $6 million
for something that has no relevance in
the clinic."
>> You know what's interesting, Dr. or
Professor Seafried, is that most of
those signaling pathways, what do they
do? They upregulate glucose and
glutamine.
>> [laughter]
>> I know.
Yeah, run by HIF and Myc. I know. The
oncogenes are facilitators opening the
floodgates for the fermentation fuel.
>> 100%.
>> All right? So, I just shut down on the
We physicians are masters at changing
diets and lifestyles to reduce the
levels of glucose and glutamine. And we
have to come in with with uh
drugs. Uh we we found these parasite
medications. So, I did a dive on this.
And it turns out that parasites, when
they proliferate, they use a little bit
of ox phos. But when they stop
proliferating and enter into residency
in the tissues, they start fermenting,
and the way they energy is mitochondrial
substrate level phosphorylation using
glutamine.
So, I'm saying, "Wow. So, if I take a
drug that's known to kill parasites like
mebendazole, fenbendazole,
um why don't we put that together with
calorie restricted ketogenic diets and a
few other things, and boy, I'll tell
you, knock the crap out of these tumor
cells. But you can't use it because you
can't make any money on on mebendazole.
It's all money, revenue generation.
Well, people people are We sacrifice the
cancer patients for the good of the of
the revenue. People people, despite
that, are doing it behind the scenes
without any guidance because no one is
willing to help them. I have a question.
I read your paper that talked about I
think you guys were the ones who
discovered that mebendazole blocks
GLS similar to that of DON.
It it it has a minor effect. It's not
nearly as powerful as DON.
>> Not nearly Okay, I was going to ask you
like what degree is it?
>> the Chinese and and people from India
and China long time ago cuz the Indians
had done a lot of work on the action of
of parasites because almost everybody in
India takes parasite medications. So,
they did a lot of work on that. They And
they knew it blocked glucose uptake.
That was one of the one of the
mechanisms. Correct.
>> But they didn't know that our paper
under review right now um or or in work
We have a bioRxiv on it where we
suggested for the first time that
mebendazole uh may also be targeting the
glutaminolysis
pathway. So, we saw glutaminase go down
with mebendazole. So, clearly it's
having some push uh on both of those
pathways. But by itself, it's not going
to be the big hammer. Right.
>> But it certainly can be a push in the
right direction, mainly because it's
nontoxic. We don't have to worry about
going bald and having your gut blown to
hell. But one one more thing
that I didn't put in the new paper in
April that has come to my attention very
recently.
Uh about the succinic acid. And this
comes back to metastasis. First of all,
cancer stem cells cannot metastasize.
Metastasis happens when the myeloid
cell, whether a macrophage or another
leukocyte, fuses with a stem cell,
creating a hybrid cell that now has the
biology and and and and biology and
biochemistry to invade, uh disseminate
through the bloodstream, and set up
secondary
uh satellites through a metastatic
process. All of this is a very
sophisticated biology that we have
studied uh in in the field of
glycobiology where I worked for decades.
How how uh these various glycolipids and
glycoproteins are upregulated to allow
macrophages, monocytes to move out of
the bloodstream into an area of
infection or inflammation.
Uh the metastatic cell is is half
macrophage. Uh it has abnormal
mitochondria, but it has the
proliferative capacity of the stem cell
in the sh- in the shell of a macrophage.
And this was done by John years
ago and many others. They just choose to
ignore all that information. The issue
is
one of the key things about metastatic
cancer is they seem to be uh they
they're immunosuppressive and resistant
to immun- immune attack. Well, guess
what?
Uh
uh people people will say, "Well, how
come
I can understand why the acidification
protects a solid tumor in a particular
tissue, but when these things get out
into the bloodstream, how come we're not
how come our immune system doesn't kill
them?"
Uh succinic acid is a powerful
immunosuppressant.
It's succinic acid being crapped out of
the metastatic cell is like a is like a
a par- a paralysis to our immune system.
Because it's a macrophage. Macrophages
are powerfully immunosuppressant like in
some cases. So, we're putting all the
biological facts together, making it
very clear. So, when when we found out,
"What do macrophages eat? What do they
What is driving them?" Glutamine is a
powerful fuel.
So, uh but you have to be careful now,
because now comes in your clinical
experience. If you're too aggressive in
targeting glutamine, you're not only uh
damage your immune system, but you
damage your gut. The gut is a big
utilizer of glutamine. So, that's why we
developed the press-pulse. You can press
glucose, but you pulse glutamine
targeting. Can I push back a little bit,
doctor? Is that okay, or professor? So,
I I of course I've seen the the the
beautiful classic graphic that you have
and then the new one that you came out
in December of 2025, and it's also
beautiful. Um
but what I This is a couple of a couple
of pieces of information that um I
wanted to put in your ear. Number one,
there was a paper that I read and I I
I'd have to pull it to to tell you
exactly what it was called, but they
showed where you when you restricted
glutamine, there was like a there was a
paradoxical immune
uh improvement. Number one, that they
didn't expect. Number two, there was
there was two there was a there was
there were papers that were done on DON.
There was a
a wonderful paper that was published. It
was called like We're not DON yet in
2018.
>> I know that. Yeah. And and it said and
if you looked at the the the the paper
the the trials that had the best
clinical outcome, it was ones that were
given a daily dose of DON.
And then the third piece of information
I wanted to put was there was a there
was also another paper that was done.
It was a phase two or one or two
clinical trial for GBM.
And they were they were using
mebendazole plus standard of care. Not
not mebendazole plus keto, not
mebendazole plus, you know, anything
else. But it was just mebendazole plus
standard of care. And it showed that
they increased the life expectancy of
these GBM patients by like like six or
eight months, which was like not quite
double what the standard of care was
getting. And they were giving
mebendazole daily, every single day. And
you're saying that, you know, we know
that from your from your work that they
have a glutamine inhibit- inhibition.
Maybe it's not strong as DON, but I'm
just it just seems like maybe that
glutamine
can be maybe maybe not completely
pressed down, but some to some degree
pressed down more chronically without
adverse effects, maybe? What do you
think about that? Uh well, we tested a
lot of that. And and if you look at the
not done yet paper, which was really
really good, and some of the others,
Barbara Slusher at Johns Hopkins is
doing this work. She's done some really
nice nice work on this. Because they're
trying to make They don't want to use
DON because you can't make any money on
it.
So, what that seems to be the driving
force for what can or cannot be used.
Um so, they're using DRP-104,
judon. They have a different varieties
and structures of these things.
Um but some of the control groups in
those papers
uh were were not were not included
completely. I'm not saying I think those
drugs they're working on will
be very valuable. But what they're not
what they never do is they never target
glucose at the same time correct
when they're doing this. Because the
whole strategy of ketogenic metabolic
therapy is a strategic attack uh
on the whole improving the whole
physiology of the patient while
specifically degrading the tumor's
two capacities. You're never going to
get
I don't want to say never, but you're
rarely going to get optimal therapeutic
outcome if you're only targeting one of
the two pathways. Although I'm shocked
that some people who are living very
very long by targeting just the glucose
pathway for sure.
Um but um but getting back specifically
uh to those to those kinds of studies,
they're always incomplete. As I said to
you, none of them are doing what we
think needs to be done. And as far as
the
uh protection of the gut, the reason why
DON was not used clinically
is because of its tremendous damage to
the gut mucositis. It was doing a lot of
the same things other chemo was doing.
But they were not targeting glucose at
the same time. They were giving high
dosage continuously, and they were
creating all kinds of problems.
Um so, clearly we need to spare
uh the gut, and we need to spare our
immune system.
As a physician, you should know that
people who are burned
uh um their skin is open now to attack
by by skin bacteria, staph and strep.
And many cases when burn patients the
burn burn patients are given high dose
glutamine as a as a therapy to ward off
or or or the infection. Mainly because
our immune system is dependent on high
dose of glutamine. Um and and and that
gives the strength of the immune system
to battle and use the call the
respiratory burst, the way you kill
bacteria. All of this is linked in one
way or another to the glutamine
metabolism. Otherwise, your patient's
going to die. Right. So, so if you're
using a drug like DON continuously,
which is a real powerful glutamine
inhibitor,
uh yeah, you're going to kill tumor
cells massively, but you're also going
to make the body vulnerable to immune uh
system failure and gut damage, and and
you're back at the square one again. So,
so the bottom line is that you've got to
you've got to strategically target the
glutamine. You can hold a chokehold on
that glucose because it's a
non-essential metabolite. The only cells
that
Well, I don't say the only, but the
cells that require glu- glucose are the
erythrocytes. They don't have a
mitochondria. They don't they they they
need But they need tiny amounts of
glucose.
Uh and some of our brain cells can use
some small Don't forget the brain will
suck out the majority of glucose that's
in your in your body. You do a little
exercise on top of that while you're in
therapeutic ketosis. And then you
sprinkle in a little bit of mebendazole.
Our our our our cocktail now consists of
DON, mebendazole, and CPI-613.
Um CPI-613 is a is a drug uh that blocks
the um alpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase
in the TCA cycle.
Um however, it was used in the clinics
for pancreatic cancer, and it was a
bust. It was too toxic.
So, um so we got we have the drug, and
uh interestingly enough, uh we tested it
alone in our cancer model, metastasis.
It was too toxic for sure.
So, my colleague Dr. Mukherjee,
uh we we found we we found out that when
you administer low dose in ketogenic
diet,
uh it becomes far less toxic, and it has
very powerful therapeutic efficacy.
So, and then the ketogenic
>> [clears throat]
>> uh transition to therapeutic ketosis
allows us to use these toxic drugs in
much much lower dosages and still
maintain the power of the therapeutic
efficacy. This is a new a new world.
This is a completely new world on how to
manage cancer. Um we can slay the beast
uh with minimal collateral toxicity once
the clinicians understand the power and
wielding the power of metabolism and
nutrition
uh to to work with the patients. Uh
right now, it's it's our way or the
highway. And the patients don't really
have any major input into the management
of their disease.
Wh- when the new when the new paradigm
comes, the patient will be the the more
the most active participant following
the guidelines of a knowledgeable
oncologist or physician.
Uh anyone who understands this
um will be able to manage these cancers.
And and we never we never use the term
cure in our word in our world here.
Uh we use the term successful
management. What does that mean? Well,
it means that you're alive when you
should have been dead, but we don't know
if you're going to ultimately be no
evidence of disease for the rest of your
life. I don't know that. This is all
new. All all we knew all we know is that
we can keep cancer patients terminal
cancer patients alive for longer far
longer than what was predicted based on
the establishment's understanding of the
situation. So, and more and more
physicians are always miffed. What one
of the things that kills me as a
non-physician
is the comments, because I get
hundreds and hundreds of comments back
from the cancer patients that are using
metabolic therapy. And when they
approach the oncologist or the
physicians, um
often times the physician will say,
"Wow, I I've never seen anything like
this. I don't know what you're doing,
but just keep on doing it." And I'm so
I'm saying to myself, "Don't you guys
want to know?
Aren't you interested
>> there's a there's a general lack of
curiosity in medicine. I don't know if
it's
that because it doesn't go along with
the dogma or if it is just because we're
so overwhelmed with a bunch of sick
patients that we don't have time to ask
the questions, but there is just a
general lack of curiosity. And I it
frustrates me beyond belief, but I I I
see that.
>> don't forget I my job here at Boston
College
half of the students that I teach are
pre-med kids that are all going to
become physicians.
And they're all
all focused on getting the highest grade
rather than really understanding the
information. They They have a They must
have huge hippocampus to memorize all
this kind of stuff. Um and and then they
just regurgitate it and and they they
practice these MCAT tests. They They
They and they're all like A A What do
they call them? Um super kinds of
students, high high octane kinds of
students. They're They're always like
memorizing stuff. They're always working
hard to get the highest grade in the
class, competing with everybody else.
And I I I think the selection of those
kinds of people may uh rule out
curiosity.
Uh I I don't think uh some uh B students
uh would make poor physicians. Uh I
think sometimes those kids might have a
more a greater level of curiosity.
Um cuz we select for the kinds of people
that can enter the medical schools. And
and it's very hard for people to get
into medical school. Uh they have to
have super high grades. They have to do
all these tests. And I think we select
for the wrong kinds of people. Not to
say that all physicians are like that,
for sure not. But they're not They're
not being allowed to think creatively.
They're just They're just do what
they're told to do and they do it in a
very efficient manner and they've been
doing that since the time they were
freshmen in college.
>> Very
very military like, you know, very
>> Yeah. Yeah. Shine your boots.
>> rarely
uh the status quo. Well, where where
Give me to be honest with you, um
we we are
we are you know, it's it almost is in
some cases, especially like in the
surgical specialties, like it is like a
boot camp, you know, like the attending
is the drill sergeant and you are just
this, you know, peon and just don't just
don't speak up and just don't let
anybody notice you and don't ask
questions and like whatever he says is
God
and that's the way it is, you know, and
that's that that is the training, you
know, in some ways. I think
>> Well, that I think I think for certain
uh
certain um skills, surgeons,
uh they need to do that. Uh they need to
have that discipline. Uh but for chronic
disease management, which is basically
crippling the entire nation, 100%.
>> Um you got you have to have a new view
on how to manage these diseases, which
is very different from the kinds of
training you're getting. Right.
>> Uh we know how to manage chronic We have
some big papers that'll be coming out uh
in the near future that that are going
to deal with this not only cancer, but
all these chronic diseases uh in a very
effective way, re- identifying every
major chronic disease as some form of
mitochondrial dysfunction. Do you know
about Dr. Doug Wallace at the Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia? He has
mitochondrial heteroplasmy graphs and
stuff like that. It looks so similar to
what you guys published, like with your
like diminishing uh OXPHOS and your, you
know, increasing SLP with as
mitochondrial dysfunction in the
just how and you you know, every every
every paper you guys put out is like a
newer beautiful graphic, but there's
like the mitochondrial cristae are all
beautiful and then it becomes less
beautiful and less beautiful and and
obviously that's showing a a
diminishment in bioenergetic decline
that that Wallace talks about with his
stuff, too. And I just thought that was
such an interesting intersection. Yeah.
I don't know I don't know Wallace
personally, although I've met him at
meetings. Uh but, you know, he's he's
heavily focused on mitochondrial DNA.
Right. And recognize and he I I In my
book on cancer as a metabolic disease,
he was one of the first to say cancer is
Well, not the first clearly Warburg had
said that. Um but he deviated uh from
that, focusing more attention on
mitochondrial DNA. In fact, that's how
we actually got started. My former
student, Mike Kibish, who's now a senior
scientist with Berg, a big
pharmaceutical company. Um
when when we when we we we didn't know
uh
at [clears throat] the beginning how
important mitochondrial DNA was to the
origin of cancer. So, we took my five uh
mouse models of cancer, each one derived
independently from the other, some
spontaneous, some chemically induced.
And we isolated and purified First, we
isolated the mitochondria.
Because a lot of people study
mitochondrial DNA by using uh snips of
mitochondrial DNA, amplifying the
material between between the the the two
um
uh the two coding regions to amplify the
middle piece.
Uh and then they look at that. But over
hundreds of millions of years of
evolution, bits and pieces of
mitochondrial DNA have seeded into the
nuclear genome. So, by using snips of of
of mitochondrial DNA, you may amplify
what we call pseudogenes in the in the
nuclear genome, giving you
misinformation. So, what we did, Kibish
did, uh we isolated and purified the
mitochondria directly out of the tumors
themselves, highly highly purified
mitochondria. And then we isolated the
DNA uh uh from the mitochondria of the
tumor cells. And then we sequenced every
single base in the mito We We actually
changed the mouse mouse mitochondrial
genome by one base because they made a
mistake. Uh we we actually sequenced the
entire mitochondrial genome in five
independently derived tumors. And we
found not one single pathogenic mutation
in any one of these five.
>> Yeah. And my a colleague or not a
colleague, but a an acquaintance, um
Eric Schon from from Columbia
University, who's a mitochondrial guru,
uh he had found uh tumors with no
mitochondrial mutation. He knew I was
right. So, cuz he had seen the same
thing. Um
uh Now, and don't forget heteroplasmy,
we we did find in one of our tumors
there was some heteroplasmy, but no no
mutation in any one of the coding uh
regions.
So, other people other people came out.
Cruz Bermudez, you should look at this.
It's a beautiful paper. They They found
uh different mutations in mitochondrial
genomes.
Like us, they found some that that had
no that had no They had mutations, but
they were not encoding regions of the
mitochondrial genome. So, it wasn't it
wasn't OXPHOS proteins. It wasn't one of
the 13 proteins that encode OXPHOS.
Well, it it was. Uh if you get one of
those and it's not completely knocked
out,
uh you can get neoplasia. But if it's
completely knocked out, you don't get
neoplasia. Cuz you'd probably rupture
the mitochondrial membrane and you would
get mitophagy.
>> so yeah, if you It was very interesting.
If you had no mitochondrial DNA, you got
no no neoplasia.
If you had perfectly clean mitochondrial
DNA, you don't get neoplasia. But you
can only get neoplasia when there was
partial disruption of proteins of the
electron transport
>> But that totally makes sense, doesn't
it? Because if then they're leaking
electrons, then you have more ROS and
then damage to mitochondrial membranes,
right? I mean Yes, and not only that, it
gives it gives the cell an opportunity
to transition to fermentation. So, so
don't forget, it's the two-step process.
>> Correct. And then we went in and you
find out that there are certain cells in
our body that rarely, if ever, perform
cancer. And those are cardiac mature
cardiac myocytes and neurons of the
central nervous system. They cannot ever
transition to fermentation. So, they
can't become cancerous. Uh they up and
die. Like Parkinson's disease, you have
mitochondrial dysfunction in Parkinson's
disease, but rather than transforming
into neoplasia, the cells die. Right.
>> So, so you have dead cells. And same
with heart cardiomyocytes, you can't get
cancer from these cells because their
demand for OXPHOS energy is so high that
they don't they can never transition
to fermentation for protracted period of
time. This was another clue that we got
for the mitochondrial substrate level
phosphorylation using glutamine as the
substrate. During heart attacks, the
body the bloodstream fills up with
lactic acid and succinic acid. Um the
succinic acid The guys in the cardiac
field knew about this a lot. But the
Apparently, the people in oncology and
and and cardiovascularities don't ever
talk to each other. They're They're They
might as well be on different planets.
Because we have known for a long time
that when during heart attacks, succinic
acid and lactic acid build up
tremendously in the bloodstream. And if
you don't bring oxygen back into that
person in a short period of time, you're
going to be dead from neuronal damage.
>> Right. Well, the same thing happens
though. The same thing happens in
sepsis, right? Sepsis, any kind of hyper
hypoperfusion disorder, we can detect
lactic acid serum lactic acid and it
will it'll change the pH. This is the
question though.
We know that the pH around the tumors
are about 6 to 6.5, but we don't see
serum lactic acid in these cancer
patients, even metastatic cancer
patients. I check it a lot, you know,
for various reasons. And Is it It need
not by reverse Warburg or where is it
going?
>> No, it's going to the liver. Reconvert
it back through the Cori cycle. Come
back to glucose. Comes back as glucose.
The only There's a few patient papers
you can read in blood cancers uh where
they patient died from lactic acidosis.
So, um I I read a couple of those where
the where the where the number of blood
number of blood cancer cells was so high
uh that the lactic acid in the
bloodstream Uh, was over 100.
>> actually now I'm thinking about it,
Professor, I actually had a case of a
guy, he had this unexplained lactic
acidosis. No one could figure it out. He
ended up having a non-solid tumor.
Yeah. Well, that there's a couple of
reports in the in the journal Blood and
the journal Circulation, uh, where
they've spoken about these kinds of
cases. But you're But you're right, with
metastatic cancer,
uh, the that's the Cori cycle, where
just like when we exercise a lot, the
lactic acid produced in the muscle is
going to the liver and being converted
back in through gluconeogenesis back
into glucose. So, the cancer cell and
and the wasting away of your muscles uh,
releases tremendous amounts of
glutamine, uh, which is part of the
cachectic cas- cascade. So, the
glucose-glutamine waste away, cachexia.
Um,
and people always say in the clinics,
"Oh, don't do fasting or ketogenic,
you're going to lose weight."
Uh, and I'm I said, "Why?" Well, the
cachectic
patient is losing weight. That's
pathological weight loss as opposed to
therapeutic weight loss. You got to
everything has to be reevaluated.
And I always find that, you know, just
to share with you, in biology, we know
structure determines function. This is
one of the foundational principles. This
applies to all areas of biology, except
oncology. The oncologists have no clue.
They can see a broken mitochondria with
no cristae and say it's working
perfectly well. Just like you said,
they're doing ox phos in hypoxia.
Correct. It
It doesn't make any sense, does it? I
mean, how do you
How do you have it in the same sentence?
It doesn't make any sense.
>> [laughter]
>> I know. Well, I How do you think I feel
when my when my students and I read all
this stuff?
That concludes part one. I hope that it
was useful to you,
enjoyable, and I hope you come back for
the second part of the interview, which
is slightly longer, next week, and
continue to learn from this fruitful
conversation between Professor Seyfried
and myself.
If you like videos like this, please
like, share, and subscribe. And until
next time.